This genius idea took the total assembly
time from 12 hours down to just 90
minutes with a new car leaving the
factory every 40 seconds. In order to
make the Model T available to the
masses, Ford had spent the entire year
rearranging machinery and setting up
assembly lines with one goal, make as
many cars as possible.
All of the fixed costs like the factory
and machines stayed basically the same
no matter how many cars they produced.
And so the more cars they made, the
cheaper would be per car.
But although Ford had optimized the
assembly of thousands of parts, the
final cars were still being assembled at
stationary workbenches. And this quickly
became the bottleneck for the entire
production.
And so, in 1914, Ford set up the holy
grail of factory efficiency, the final
assembly line.
The idea was simple. All of the
sub-assembly lines would feed a constant
supply of finished parts into the final
assembly line where they would be
mounted onto the chassis as it moved
through the factory.
The entire assembly process was studied
and broken down into 45 individual steps
assigned to 140 workers and spread out
across the line.
Here's how it worked.
Basic chassis would leave a sub-assembly
line and enter the start of the final
assembly line where they would get
pulled along by a chain driven sled. As
the chassis moved down the line, workers
added the front and rear axles and soon
after the gas tanks which were
conveniently rolled down a chute from a
sub-assembly line above.
Further down the line, the engine would
be dropped into place from an overhead
rail that fed the workers with a
constant supply of finished engines.
The dashboard, steering, exhaust, and
pedals would all come together in a
quick sequence of tasks.
Finished wheels from the sub-assembly
line would drop down holes in the floor
and two workers would attach all four
wheels to the car.
The radiators were stored in a raised
platform above and would slide down a
chute ready for the workers to install.
For work that had to be done underneath
the car, special creepers were made that
could clamp onto the chassis as it
moved.
This meant that workers could lie down
and work on the car with both hands as
they got pulled along.
After 44 steps, the cars would be driven
off the assembly line under their own
power onto another assembly line outside
the factory.
Just above the final assembly line was
the body shop.
Here, all of the body parts were stamped
and assembled into a lightweight piece
and moved outside to a platform. The
finished chassis would move under this
platform and the body would be lowered
on top, completing the entire assembly
in just 90 minutes.